.TH YACFS 1 "2026-05-28" "YAcFS v2.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
yacfs \- Yet Another common File System
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B yacfs
\fImountpoint\fR [\fB\-o\fR \fIoptions\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
YAcFS is a copy-on-write, content-addressed, checksummed userspace filesystem
built on FUSE3. It provides ZFS-class data integrity features (checksums,
compression, snapshots, pooling) without ZFS's licensing restrictions or btrfs's
stability issues.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-o\~pool=\fIdir\fR[\fB:\fIdir\fR]
Pool directory (required). Multiple directories can be separated by ':'
for pool spanning.
.TP
.BI \-o\~compress=\fIlevel\fR
ZSTD compression level (0=off, default=1, max=19). Level 1 is optimal for
most workloads. Levels above 3 trade write speed for storage efficiency.
.TP
.BI \-o\~snapdir=\fIdir\fR
Snapshot storage directory (default: \fIpool\fB/.snapshots\fR).
.TP
.BR \-f
Run in foreground.
.TP
.BR \-d
Enable FUSE debug output (implies \-f).

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Basic mount
yacfs /mnt/data \-o pool=/data/pool
.TP
Pool spanning
yacfs /mnt/data \-o pool=/disk1:/disk2:/disk3
.TP
Maximum compression
yacfs /mnt/data \-o pool=/data/pool,compress=19

.SH TOOLS
.TP
.B yacfs-ctl
Pool status, snapshot management, rollback
.TP
.B yacfs-gc
Remove orphaned blocks (garbage collection)
.TP
.B yacfs-scrub
Verify all data integrity
.TP
.B yacfs-send
Send snapshot to remote receiver
.TP
.B yacfs-receive
Receive snapshots from remote senders

.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/local/bin/yacfs
Main filesystem daemon
.TP
.I /usr/local/bin/yacfs-*
Management tools
.TP
.I /etc/systemd/system/yacfs@.service
Systemd mount unit

.SH BUGS
Report bugs to https://github.com/spivanatalie64/spivanatalie64.github.io/issues

.SH AUTHORS
Natalie Spiva <natalie@acreetionos>, Darren Clift <cobra3282000>
.SH LICENSE
GPLv3
